For this project, my team and I used two datasets: “hpsa.csv” and “CA_datapile.xlsx”.


The “hpsa.csv” file used Health Professional Shortage Areas (HPSA) data extracted from the California Department of Health Access. This data describes the geographic Health Professional Shortage Area (HPSA) federal designations for Primary Care, Mental Health, and Dental Health in counties within California. This original dataset contains 7,442 observations, and we extracted 10 of the 65 original variables. After identifying repeated counties, we removed repeat observations and selected only those that were unique, which led to a dataset with 587 unique observations. Also, two variables were collapsed: Health Professional Shortage Area (HPSA) population type was collapsed from two categories, migrant population and native Americans; rural status was collapsed from non rural, unknown, partially rural, and rural. This led us to have a total of 8 variables including metropolitan_indicator, designation_type, hpsa_status, hpsa_score, hpsa_designation_population, u_s_mexico_border_county_indicator, rural_status, and hpsa_population_type. Once this dataset was cleaned, it was written into the “hpsa.csv” file and used to answer whether health facilities within a county can be designated as a HPSA based on these variables.


Our “CA_datapile.xlsx” filed used data from a published dataset in the California's Department of Health Care Access and Information. This dataset, with information from 2016 to 2021, looks at California Hospital Inpatient Mortality rates for 6 medical conditions and 5 procedures. It also contains demographic data for California counties which will let us ask research questions about how county-level demographics intersect patient outcome, specifically mortality. Specifically, it looks at various variables including sex, race, poverty, unemployment, and median income. To conduct regression analysis, a quantitative variable was needed. As a result, our team decided to take the Inpatient Mortality Indicators (IMI) data, extract cases and deaths due to heart attack in a hospital, and standardized these values by calculating the number of heart attack cases for every 1000 people and the number of heart attack deaths for every 1000 people. Once this was done, data cleaning occurred. Strings were transformed to factor variables and extracted features using regex. Each hospital had a categorical performance rating (worse, better, and as expected). Data tidying occurred next. The thousands of observations of hospital, cases, and demographic data was distilled to about a hundred entries. Every row is a unique combination of the cases and death rates per 1000 in hospitals in a specific county with a particular rating, as well as the additional hospital HPSA status and demographic information. Also, we removed hospital observational rows with missing entries in hospital quality, which is a factor that can lead to bias. To address missing data, we could have explored various alternative tactics: mean imputation and multivariate imputation, both of which were not used for logistical reasons. Ultimately, this new dataset will help us answer whether mortality rate can be predicted from disease prevalence and demographic conditions (such as healthcare funding or median income) within counties in California